## Analysis functions

### Flux balance analysis (FBA)

Optimizes the value of the current objective function and shows a flux distribution that realizes this optimum.
The objective function is a linear function over the reaction rates in the network, its coefficients can be modified in the reaction dialogs.
To display the current objective function you can choose *Show optimization function* from the *Analysis* menu.
The current objective value is shown in the console as well as the status bar at the bottom of the main window.
Note that the flux distribution calculated by FBA is usually not unique.

### Auto FBA

This is a checkable option which switches the "Auto FBA" mode on or off. In "Auto FBA" mode a FBA is automatically performed when a scenario is changed or when a reaction property that potentially influences the FBA result is changed.

### Parsimonious FBA (pFBA)

In parsimonious FBA first the objective function optimized and then with this optimum as additional constraint the sum of the fluxes in the network is minimized.
This has the advantage that redundant internal cyclic fluxes are suppressed and that a lot of reactions will have zero flux which makes the solution easier to understand.

### Flux variability analysis (FVA)

In FVA the maximal/minimal rate of each reaction is calculated.
This gives the possible flux range for each reaction.

### Make scenario feasible

A scenario is infeasible if the given fluxes in this scenario are incompatible with each other. An example would be a flux of a product that is higher than the substrate flux multiplied by the maximal product yield. Such a situation could for instance arise due to measurement errors if the given fluxes come from experimental measurements.

With "Make scenario feasible" the given fluxes in the scenario and/or the biomass composition are are adjusted to make the fluxes consistent. This basically relies on minimzing the sum of deviations from the given fluxes and/or deviations from the stoichiometric coefficients the biomass reactions. There are is on main settings that controls this minimization: One can choose whether the deviations are linear or quadratic terms, resulting in a linear program (LP) or quadratic program (QP) respectively (the latter requires a QP-capable solver like CPLEX or Gurobi).

![
**Make scenario feasible dialog.**
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cnapy-org/CNApy-guide/main/content/images/make-scenario-feasible-dialog.png "Make scenario feasible dialog"){#fig:make-feasibile-dialog}

#### Allow corrections to given fluxes using the following weights

If this option is activated, adjustments of the given fluxes are allowed. Here you can set the (reciprocal) weights with which the flux deviations enter the objective function: They can either all be equal, relative to their absolute flux values (i.e. larger fluxes are more likely to be changed when resolving infeasibilities), or taken from a specified field in the reaction annotation. In the last case, where a reaction has no entry in the specified annotation field, the default weight is used. The default weight/scale factor also scales all flux deviation weights and can thus be used to adjust the relative importance between flux corrections and biomass adjustments in the mimization. Concretely, lowering the scale factor here means that flux deviations become more expensive than biomass adjustments.

#### Allow adjustment of the biomass reaction

If this option is activated the biomass composition may be changed during minimization. To use this option it is required to selecet a biomass reaction and this reaction must have a fixed flux in the current scenario. There are two major ways in which the biomass reaction can be modified: The biomass composition may be allowed to change and/or the amount of growth-associated maintenance (GAM) may vary.

#### Select adjustable biomass constituents

Here a table is shown with the components of the biomass reactions as well as their stoichiometries and formulas. In the first column of this table you can (de-)select the components whose stoichiometries may be allowed to change. Note that you can only select components that have a formula so that their molecular weights can be calculated. These are required to set up a constraint which ensures that the overall biomass weight remains constant. You can also specify the maximal relative coefficient change [%] and whether the change should be measured in mmol or gram.

#### Allow adjustment of growth-associated ATP maintenance (GAM)

With this option you activate the adjustment of GAM, if it has been integrated into the biomass reaction. For this you need to specify the metabolites of an ATP hydrolysis reaction together with the amount of GAM that has been set in the model. The GAM amount can either be given as a number or you can specify a metabolite of the ATP hydrolysis reaction (ADP should work in most situations) whose coefficient from the biomass reaction is then used as GAM amount. Also, you can set the maximal amount of GAM change together with a weight for this change in the overall minimization.

#### Compute

After optimization, the current scenario is modified so that it contains the calculated consistent fluxes and the necessary changes are shown on the console. If any adjustment of the biomass reaction occured then the modified biomass reaction is also shown on the console and it is added to the current scenario (see the scenario tab) if the "Add modified biomass reaction to scenario" was activated. You can perform the calculation repeatedly with different settings while the dialog is open without the need to go back in the scenario histroy. You can reset the original scenario fluxes via the scenario history but if a modified biomass reaction was added to the scenario you need to remove this via the scenario tab.

Note that only reactions with scenario fluxes fixed to values unequal to zero enter the optimization. Reactions which have an exactly zero flux in the scenario will be considered as removed from the network.

Known issue: The solvers are currently accessed through the optlang interface. Setting up the quadratic ojective for the QP via this interface incurs a significant overhead which increases with the number of fluxes set in the scenario. This means that the method as a whole can become quite slow in case more than a few dozen fluxes were set despite the fact that solving the QP itself is ususally quite fast.

### Elementary modes (EFM)

EFM can be calculated via [efmtool](https://csb.ethz.ch/tools/software/efmtool.html) which is automatically installed with CNApy. After calculation a [navigation panel](#efmmcs-navigation-and-analysis) appears to acces the results.

#### Options

When reactions are marked with 0 flux in a scenario and the option “consider 0 in current scenario as off” is activated then only the subset of EFM/EFV is calculated in which these reactions do not participate

### Computational strain design

#### Minimal cut sets

Minimal cut sets (MCS) can be calculated in CNApy using the dual method. After calculation a [navigation panel](#emfmcs-navigation-and-analysis) appears to acces the results.

![
**Minimal cut sets computation dialog.**
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cnapy-org/CNApy-guide/main/content/images/mcs-dialog.png "Minimal cut sets computation dialog"){#fig:mcs-dialog}

- Target and Desired region(s)

For the dual method one or more target regions must be defined which describe the network behaviour that is to be suppressed.
In addition, one or more desired regions may be defined which describe the network behaviour that is to be preserved.
Each target/desired region is defined by a set of linear equality constraints over the reaction rates in the network.
All target and desired regions must be initially feasible or an error will be raised. Also make sure that 0 is not included in any target or desired region (0 as target cannot be suppressed and 0 as desired is always fulfilled).

Note that all non-default reaction bounds (as defined by cobra.Configuration().bounds) are automatically added to all target and desired regions before MCS computation.

- Current solver

MCS can be calculated via optlang using the currently active MILP solver.
Not all variants and solvers allow for the same options so these will partly be disabled depending on the chosen solver.

- Max. solutions

Maximal number of MCS to calculate.

- Max. size

Only calculate MCS which consists of up to this number of cuts.

- Time limit

Do not run the search for longer than this limit.
It is strongly recommended to use this parameter because MCS computation can take very long especially when searching for smallest MCS.

- MCS search

MCS can be enumerated iteratively, either the smallest first (least number of cuts) or any MCS (up to the number of cuts given by max. size).
With the latter option new MCS are found more quickly but may not be the smallest.

With CPLEX or Gurobi as solver, MCS can also be enumerated by cardinality, i.e. all MCS of successively increasing size (up to max. size) are computed.
In addition, with these solvers a continuous search mode is possible which is similar to the any MCS method but usually much faster.

- Exclude boundary reactions as cuts

Do not allow knock-out of boundary reactions (reactions that cross the system boundary, e.g. exchange reactions).

- Consider constraints given by scenario

Take reaction bounds set by the current scenario into account for all target and desired regions.

#### Compute strain designs

Opens a dialog which serves as front-end of the [StrainDesign](https://github.com/klamt-lab/straindesign) package for MILP-based strain design computation which supports MCS, MCS with nested optimization, OptKnock, RobustKnock and OptCouple, GPR-rule integration, gene and reaction knockouts and additions as well as regulatory interventions. A detailed description can be found in its [documentation](https://straindesign.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

### EFM/MCS Navigation and analysis

After the computation of EFM or MCS a navigation panel appears below the map. With this you can browse through the results, select a subset of the modes/MCS and show some statistics. There is also a button for saving the results and one to clear them and close the navigation panel.

![
**Mode/MCS Navigation Panel.**
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cnapy-org/CNApy-guide/main/content/images/mode-navigator.png "Mode/MCS Navigation Panel"){#fig:navigator}

- Select...

In this text field you can enter a comma-separated list of reaction IDs. After pressing "Enter" on the keyboard the subset of modes/MCS is shown in which all specified reactions occur. If you prepend a reaction ID with an exclamation mark (e.g. !R1) this means that the specified reaction must not participate in selected the modes/MCS. To revert the selection click on the clear button embedded in the text field.

- Reaction participation

Calculate the relative participation of each reaction in the currently selected modes/MCS. The results are shown in the reaction boxes and the "Flux" column of the reaction list.

- Size histogram

Calculate the pathway lengths/number of reactions of the currently selected modes/MCS. The result is shown as a size historam in the integrated Jupyter console.

### Flux optimization

Launches a dialog in which you can enter a linear expression (over the fluxes) that can then be maximized or minimized. The result is then displayed on the map(s) and the reaction list.
The flux values of the current scenario are taken into during the optimization.

### Yield optimization

Launches a dialog in which you can enter two linear expressions (over the fluxes), which serve as numerator/denominator of a linear-fractional program which is then maximized or minimized.
A typical application would be the maximization of a product yield: When the exchange fluxes for ethanol and glucose are *EX_etoh* and *EX_glc* then maximizing *EX_etoh/-EX_glc gives* the maximal ethanol yield on glucose.
For this to work correctly, there must be no flux vector in the network where the denominator becomes zero and the nominator is non-zero.
The result is then displayed on the map(s) and the reaction list.
The flux values of the current scenario are taken into during the optimization.

### Plot flux space

Launches a dialog in which you can configure a plot that shows the projection of the solution space in 2D or 3D where the axes can be flux expressions or yield expressions.
In the simplest case one can for example plot the growth rate against the substrate uptake rate.
The flux values of the current scenario are taken into account during the calculations.

### OptMDFpathway

Launches a dialog with which you can start [OptMDFpathway](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006492), a mixed-integer linear program which allows one to find - with a given metabolic network, linear constraints (such as a minimal growth rate), metabolite concentration ranges and Gibbs free energies of reactions (ΔG'°) - a pathway with the highest possible max-min driving force (MDF, in kJ/mol). If the MDF is negative, one knows that, at least as deduced by the given thermodynamic data (metabolite concentration ranges and Gibbs free energies), there is *no* thermodynamically feasible solution. If the MDF is positive, one knows that there *is* a thermodynamically feasible solution.

In order to set-up a CNApy model for OptMDFpathway (or any of the following thermodynamics-using methods), you have to provide metabolite concentration ranges as well as reaction ΔG'° values as mentioned below.

Once this is set up, you can run OptMDFpathway either at the optimal value of the model's or scenario's objective (which is calculated in advance without thermodynamic constraints) by activating the checkbox, or without regarding the objective value.

### Thermodynamic FBA

This thermodynamic FBA is derived from OptMDFpathway (see above) and requires a *minimal* MDF that must be at least reached and for which a steady-state solution is searched for. The main difference to OptMDFPathway is that the given steady-state solution does *not* have to be at the OptMDF, but just at any MDF between the given minimal MDF and the OptMDF, which allows for more possible solutions. E.g., if you set a small positive minimal MDF of, e.g., 0.0001 kJ/mol, you essentially perform an FBA where thermodynamic feasibility is ensured. Again, if you activate the checkbox, you can perform this calculation at the optimal objective value which is calculate in advance.

Note that, just like with normal flux balance analysis and OptMDFpathway, the resulting flux solution does not have to be unique.

### Thermodynamic bottleneck analysis

Each thermodynamic solution is restricted by at least one *thermodynamic bottleneck*, i.e., there is at least one reactions whose ΔG'° poses a limit on the OptMDF with the given metabolite concentration ranges. In order to find ways to solve these bottlenecks, it may be interesting to find them.

Furthermore, with a given pre-calculated set of ΔG'° values and concentration ranges, a metabolic model seems to be thermodynamically infeasible (i.e., OptMDF < 0 kJ/mol) at a biologically typical situation such as high growth rates. This problem may arise from some extreme ΔG'° values which are erroneously calculated so that the resulting reactions become thermodynamic bottlenecks.

Hence, in order to identify thermodynamic bottlenecks, CNApy provides a thermodynamic bottleneck analysis. It is a mixed-integer linear problem (MILP) which identifies a *minimal* set of reactions whose ΔG'° has to be disregarded (i.e., their ΔG'° becomes -∞) such that a user-given minimal OptMDF (e.g., a positive one so that thermodynamic feasibility is possible) can be reached. This minimal list of affected thermodynamic bottlenecks is then printed to the console below the map for further study.

### Loading metabolite concentration ranges

In order for any thermodynamic method of CNApy to work, *every* metabolite of the model needs a minimal (Cmin) and maximal (Cmax) concentration which is given in M (mol/l). A typical standard Cmin is 1e-6 M, a typical Cmax 0.02 M, except of protons (H+), which typically get a Cmin and Cmax of 1 M so that their concentration does not have an effect on the MDF as H+ is typically already accounted for in the ΔG'° calculation.

There are 3 ways to load metabolite concentration ranges into your model:

1. You can manually add a "Cmin" and "Cmax" annotation (as keys) to each of your model's metabolites, with the respective concentration as value.
2. You can create and then load an Excel XLSX in the following example form (i.e., the first line has the given captions and the following lines correspond to these captions):

| Metabolite ID | Cmin | Cmax |
|---------------|------|------|
| DEFAULT       | 1e-6 | 0.02 |
| h_c           | 1.0  | 1.0  |
| h_p           | 1.0  | 1.0  |

This table actually encodes the mentioned typical standard concentration ranges: 1 M for protons (here given by their BiGG IDs in the cytoplasm (_c) and periplasm (_p)) and 1e-6 M to 0.02 M for *all other* metabolties as "DEFAULT" is a special table keyword with which all metabolites for which no concentration ranges are given (here, all metabolites except of h_c and h_p) get these default concentration ranges. Note that the metabolite IDs given must correspond exactly to the one in your model, including lower and upper case.

CNApy can load this Excel XLSX through "Analysis->Load concentration ranges->As Excel XLSX".

3. As an alternative to the Excel XLSX, you can also give the concentration range data in the form of a [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) file, which can be seen as a text file which can contain a typical [Python dictionary](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries). For example, with CNApy's OptMDFpathway implementation, the Excel XLSX's content would look like the following as a JSON file:

```json
{
    "DEFAULT": {
        "min": 1e-6,
        "max": 0.02
    },
    "h_c": {
        "min": 1.0,
        "max": 1.0
    },
    "h_p": {
        "min": 1.0,
        "max": 1.0
    }
}
```

CNApy can load this JSON through "Analysis->Load concentration ranges->As JSON".

### Loading reaction ΔG'° values

In order for any thermodynamic method of CNApy to work, *at least one* reaction (the more, the better) needs an associated Gibbs free energy value (ΔG'°) in kJ/mol. One convenient way to calculate ΔG'° for a reaction *in silico* is the [eQuiilibrator web-site](https://equilibrator.weizmann.ac.il/). If you have experience with programming in Python, you can also automate the task using the [eQuilibrator API](https://gitlab.com/equilibrator/equilibrator-api). Typically, the eQuilibrator does not only return a ΔG'° but also an uncertainty in the calculation of the value.

Once you have calculated or measured ΔG'° values, you can include them into a CNApy project in one of three ways:

1.  You can manually add a "dG0" (for the ΔG'° value) and "dG0_uncertainty" annotation (as keys) to each of your model's metabolites, with the respective concentration as value.
2. You can create and then load an Excel XLSX in the following example form (i.e., the first line has the given captions and the following lines correspond to these captions):

| Reaction ID | dG’° [kJ/mol] | dG’° uncertainty [kJ/mol] |
|-------------|---------------|---------------------------|
| GAPD        | 0.28          | 0.0003                    |
| PGM         | -4.12         | -0.0005                   |

Here, we set a small positive ΔG'° for the reaction GAPD and a larger negative one for PGM. Note that the reaction IDs given must correspond exactly to the one in your model, including lower and upper case. The sign of the ΔG’° uncertainty does not matter as only its absolute value is used.

3. As an alternative to the Excel XLSX, you can also give the ΔG'° range data in the form of a [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) file, which can be seen as a text file which can contain a typical [Python dictionary](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries). For example, with CNApy's OptMDFpathway implementation, the shown Excel XLSX's content would look like the following as a JSON file:

```json
{
    "GAPD": {
        "dG0": 0.28,
        "uncertainty": 0.0003
    },
    "PGM": {
        "dG0": -4.12,
        "uncertainty": -0.0005
    }
}
```

### Show model stats

Shows the stoichiometric matrix and basic model properties on the console. In particular, the degrees of freedom of the stoichiometric matrix and the number of conservation relations are calculated for this.

### Net conversion of the external metabolites

Shows the conversion of external metabolites of the current flux distribution. Because there are no external metabolites in COBRApy models this conversion is derived from the rates through the boundary fluxes.

### Compute in/out fluxes at a metabolite

If a flux distribution has been calculated (e.g. by FBA) this function shows the magnitude of all fluxes going in/coming out of a specified metabolite.
The reaction fluxes are displayed as stacked bar graphs on the console.
You can either call this function from the Analysis menu and specify a metabolite or right-click on a metabolite in the list and call the function from the context menu.

### Clipboard calculator

![
**Clipboard calculator.**
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cnapy-org/CNApy-guide/main/content/images/clipboard-calculator.png "Clipboard calculator"){#fig:clipboard-calc}

The clipboard calculator allows you to perform arithmetic operations with the values stored in the clipboard, the current reaction rates or a fixed value that you can enter in this dialog.
The result of the operation replaces the current flux values.


### Programming CNApy

##### Under Construction

- accessing the COBRApy Model
- accessing scenario and computed values
- accessing the CNApy UI
